docs: storing large values & avoiding TOAST bloat (database guide) (#47249)
supabase/supabase: apps/docs/content/guides/database/storing-large-values.mdx

---
id: 'storing-large-values'
title: 'Storing large values and avoiding TOAST bloat'
description: 'How Postgres stores large text and JSON, and how to model large payloads (like LLM prompts and responses) so they do not bloat your tables.'
subtitle: 'Model large text/JSON payloads without bloating your tables.'
---

> Applications that store large values in a single column — LLM prompts and responses, chat memory, big JSON documents, base64 blobs — can grow a table to tens or hundreds of GB even with relatively few rows. This guide explains how Postgres stores large values, how to decide between keeping them in Postgres and offloading them to [Storage](/docs/guides/storage), and how to keep tables lean.

Reviewer: General note across the doc to clean up simplicity of sentence structures. 
```suggestion
This guide explains how Postgres stores large values and helps you decide between keeping large values in Postgres or offloading them to Storage.

Applications that store large values in a single column can grow a table to tens or hundreds of GB even with relatively few rows. Large values can include LLM prompts and responses, chat memory, big JSON documents, and base64 blob. Because of this challenge, you may need strategies to keep tables lean.
```

Suggestions:
- **Move 'this guide' to the top:** As general convention. If this is not where the reader wants to be, they can move on quickly.
- **Move "keep tables lean":** Which I think was implied by the Storage offload.
- **Remove Storage link:** This change is debatable. Generally, a cross-reference should be intentional, with a clear reason for its placement that would help. Linking is helpful with included context.

> 

Reviewer: It would be great to add additional glue here about how to navigate this guide with links to the various sections. It seems like you want the reader to go through a numbered procedure of sorts, so you can put that here in a numbered list.

You need to...
1. See if you have a TOAST issue
2. Decide how to resolve it
3. Resolve it

> ## How Postgres stores large values (TOAST)

Reviewer: I would like to see the (TOAST) on first usage in the body and perhaps include the full phrase on first usage: The Oversized-Attribute Storage Technique

> When a row is wider than ~2 KB, Postgres automatically moves large column values out of the main table into a companion **TOAST** table, compressing them first. This is transparent — your queries don't change — but it means a table's size is often dominated by its hidden TOAST relation, not by the columns you see.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a row is wider than ~2 KB, Postgres automatically moves large column values out of the main table into a companion The Oversized-Attribute Storage Technique (**TOAST**) table, compressing them first. This is transparent — your queries don't change — but it means a table's size is often dominated by its hidden TOAST relation, not by the columns you see.
```

Reviewer: +1. I made this note on the header above.

> When a row is wider than ~2 KB, Postgres automatically moves large column values out of the main table into a companion **TOAST** table, compressing them first. This is transparent — your queries don't change — but it means a table's size is often dominated by its hidden TOAST relation, not by the columns you see.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a row is wider than ~2 KB, Postgres automatically compresses and moves large column values out of the main table into a companion **TOAST** table. Your queries don't change, but a table's size can be dominated by its hidden TOAST relation.
```
This suggestion simplifies the content. 
Simple sentence structure is good for localization.
Source: [Google's developer documentation style guide](https://developers.google.com/style/translation?utm_source=chatgpt.com#use-simpler-words-and-shorter-sentences).

> Each large value is compressed, then split into ~2 KB chunks stored as rows in the TOAST table. See the Postgres docs on [TOAST](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/storage-toast.html) for details.

Reviewer: This seems a little redundant. Good, logical placement of the TOAST docs.

A column's storage strategy controls this:

| Strategy   | Compression | Out-of-line (TOAST) | Notes                                           |
| ---------- | ----------- | ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `EXTENDED` | Yes         | Yes                 | Default for `text`, `jsonb`, `bytea`            |
| `EXTERNAL` | No          | Yes                 | Faster partial reads, larger storage            |
| `MAIN`     | Yes         | Last resort         | Keeps data in-line when it fits                 |
| `PLAIN`    | No          | No                  | Only for types that can't be stored out-of-line |

<Admonition type="note">

> LLM payloads are usually high-entropy and unique, so Postgres's default compression recovers little. The value still gets TOASTed — it doesn't shrink much. That's why _how much_ you store matters more than compression settings.

Reviewer: Same note as previous. Simplify sentences. Also, remove emphasis and try to avoid phrases like "that is" in favor of including the subject.

</Admonition>

## Symptoms you have a TOAST problem

> 

Reviewer: Headers direct the eye but do not in themselves contain vital information.

It is helpful to repeat the information.

```suggestion
## Diagnosing a TOAST problem

Symptoms you have a TOAST problem:

```

- A table is far larger than its row count suggests, and `pg_total_relation_size` is dominated by TOAST.

> - Disk usage doesn't drop after deleting many rows. This is expected Postgres behavior — see [Reclaiming space](#reclaiming-space) below for why, and how to recover it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Disk usage doesn't drop after deleting many rows. This is expected Postgres behavior. See [Reclaiming space](#reclaiming-space) below for why, and how to recover it.
```

> ## Keep in Postgres or offload to Storage

Reviewer: Would this header be more effective renamed as handling the problem?

The user had diagnosed a TOAST issue. This is now what to do about it.

Use this as a decision framework, not a rule:

> | Keep in Postgres when…                                    | Offload to Storage when…                                          |

Reviewer: Love this table.

| --------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| You query _into_ the value (filter/index on its contents) | You only ever read the whole value back by key                    |
| Values are modest (low KB) and bounded                    | Values are large (100s of KB–MB) or unbounded                     |
| You need transactional consistency with the row           | The payload is an artifact (a generated file, a raw response log) |
| Row count is moderate                                     | The table grows without limit (e.g. one row per request)          |

> For AI apps, a common split: keep small, frequently queried fields (status, token counts, a short summary, embeddings) in Postgres; offload the raw prompt/response/log to [Storage](/docs/guides/storage) and keep a path pointer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For AI apps, a common split is to keep small, frequently queried fields (status, token counts, a short summary, embeddings) in Postgres and offload the raw prompt/response/log to [Storage](/docs/guides/storage) and keep a path pointer.
```

> For AI apps, a common split: keep small, frequently queried fields (status, token counts, a short summary, embeddings) in Postgres; offload the raw prompt/response/log to [Storage](/docs/guides/storage) and keep a path pointer.

Reviewer: Recommend avoiding parenthesis unless for acronym.
Recommend avoiding `/` in favor of "and" or "or." Imagine a screenreader reading the text aloud.

```suggestion
For AI apps, this is a common split:

- Keep small, frequently queried fields such as status, token counts, a short summary, and embeddings in Postgres.
- Offload the raw prompt, response, or log to Storage and keep a path pointer. For more information, see [Storage](/docs/guides/storage)
```

## Keeping large values in Postgres

If the data belongs in Postgres, model it to limit bloat:

- **Prefer `jsonb` over `json`** for structured payloads (see [Managing JSON data](/docs/guides/database/json)).

> - **Don't store the same payload twice.** Duplicate columns (e.g. a truncated and a full copy of the same response) double TOAST size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Don't store the same payload twice.** Don't duplicate columns to double TOAST size. Duplicated columns are truncated and full copies of the same response.
```

- **Split cold, large columns into a side table** keyed by the primary key. Keeping the hot, frequently-updated row narrow reduces churn and keeps the main table fast:

  ```sql
  create table requests (
    id bigint primary key generated always as identity,
    created_at timestamptz default now(),
    status text,
    input_tokens int,
    output_tokens int
  );

  create table request_payloads (
    request_id bigint primary key references requests (id) on delete cascade,
    prompt text,
    response jsonb
  );
  ```

> - **Set a retention policy.** If old rows aren't needed, delete them on a schedule with [pg_cron](/docs/guides/database/extensions/pg_cron). (Deleting alone won't shrink the file — see [Reclaiming space](#reclaiming-space).)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Set a retention policy.** If old rows aren't needed, delete them on a schedule with [pg_cron](/docs/guides/database/extensions/pg_cron). Deleting alone won't shrink the file. See [Reclaiming space](#reclaiming-space).
```

```sql
create table generations (
  id bigint primary key generated always as identity,
  created_at timestamptz default now(),
  model text,
  input_tokens int,
  output_tokens int,
  response_path text -- e.g. 'responses/2026/06/abc123.json' in a Storage bucket
);
```

```js
// Upload the large payload to Storage, store only the path in Postgres
const path = `responses/${id}.json`
await supabase.storage.from('generations').upload(path, JSON.stringify(payload))
await supabase.from('generations').update({ response_path: path }).eq('id', id)
```

This keeps the table small and fast to query while the heavy bytes live in object storage.

## Measuring bloat

Check how much of a table (and its TOAST) is live data versus reclaimable free space. `pgstattuple` is available on Supabase:

```sql
create extension if not exists pgstattuple;

with t as (select 'public.your_table'::regclass as rel)
select 'heap'  as scope, s.* from t, lateral pgstattuple_approx(t.rel) s
union all
select 'toast' as scope, s.* from t, lateral pgstattuple_approx(
  (select reltoastrelid from pg_class where oid = t.rel)::regclass) s;
```

> A high `approx_free_percent` means reclaimable bloat; a high `approx_tuple_percent` means the data is genuinely large and you should reduce what you store. See [`pgstattuple`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstattuple.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A high `approx_free_percent` means reclaimable bloat. A high `approx_tuple_percent` means the data is genuinely large, and you should reduce what you store. See [`pgstattuple`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstattuple.html).
```

  ```sql
  create table requests (
    id bigint primary key generated always as identity,
    created_at timestamptz default now(),
    status text,
    input_tokens int,
    output_tokens int
  );

  create table request_payloads (
    request_id bigint primary key references requests (id) on delete cascade,
    prompt text,
    response jsonb
  );
  ```

- **Set a retention policy.** If old rows aren't needed, delete them on a schedule with [pg_cron](/docs/guides/database/extensions/pg_cron). Deleting alone won't shrink the file. See [Reclaiming space](#reclaiming-space).
- **Consider `lz4` column compression.** Supabase's Postgres supports `lz4`, which is faster than the default `pglz` and often compresses better. Set it per column with `ALTER TABLE … ALTER COLUMN … SET COMPRESSION lz4`. For the underlying setting, see [`default_toast_compression`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-client.html#GUC-DEFAULT-TOAST-COMPRESSION). Compression applies only to values written after you make the change. It helps structured or repetitive JSON more than unique text.

> - **Keep embeddings small.** Embeddings are large values too. A vector's storage scales with its dimension count: pgvector stores `4 × dimensions + 8 bytes`. A 1536-dimension vector is therefore about 6 KB, so it gets TOASTed. pgvector runs similarity search by querying and indexing the vector column. An embedding with fewer dimensions stores less. You can also store it as `halfvec`, which uses 2 bytes per dimension instead of 4. For large-scale workloads, Supabase Vector Buckets store embeddings in object storage. This feature is in early development. Review its current status first. See [Vector Buckets](/docs/guides/storage/vector/introduction) and the [pgvector guide](/docs/guides/database/extensions/pgvector).

Reviewer: This new section reads a bit dense. For less technical readers, it may fly over their head.
